---
title:      "Growth Mindset"
date:       2023-09-14T11:26:15-04:00
tags:       ["life"]
identifier: "20230914T112615"
---

A mindset is a mental frame or lens that selectively organizes and
encodes information. 

There are two types of mindsets: fixed mindset and growth mindset.

Fixed mindset believes that human qualities are fixed: e.g. our
intelligence is static and will forever be the same regardless of
anything that happens in our lives.

Growth mindset is based on the idea of neuroplasticity, it believes
that intelligence, as well as other qualities, are malleable and will
change (for the good or for the bad) depending on the circumstances.

There was a paper in the late 90's that was about how praising
intelligence diminishes results in mental activity. They took a group
of children and divided it in three groups: the control group (didn't
receive any feedback between effort activities), the identity based
feedback group, when they were told that 'they were very intelligent',
'they had good memory', i.e. "labels" about how they "were". In the third
group, the effort-based feedback group, the children were told of how
good they put on the effort to do the task, of how good it was that
(in the case they didn't come up with the right answer) despite not
getting it, that they kept trying and trying 'till the end.

A label based praise group, had a significant drop in performance after
treatment (behavior / identity / label feedback), but the effort /
action / verb group, had a significant increase on results after its
corresponding treatment.

Similar results were found in many other experiments that mimicked
this one.

Other important results were 1) the label feedback group (we're
calling it like that from now on), on next rounds of activities, if
given the opportunity to choose between a challenging new activity,
or a already-known-for-being-good-at activity, they will choose the
latter, because they want to minimize the probability of not getting
the results they think themselves to get always (to fail, because they
cannot let themselves to fail, because 'they were born winners', fixed
mindset). On the contrary, the effort feedback group, got more
involved in brand new challenging activities and, although they
sometimes failed at them, it didn't hurt their egos, so they kept
trying and kept becoming better at it, repeatedly, over and over
again.

Also, another interesting result, is that the label feedback group
were told to rate their work in a ordinal scale (1 to 10, for
example), they often overrated their own work (most cases were when
their work was near perfect but with some errors, they believed
themselves to have done a perfect job); whereas the effort feedback
group were more objective in their own rating of their job.

The timing doesn't seem to be important: you could give someone the
feedback before or after an effort activity, and the detriments or
benefits of that feedback (label-based and effort-based, respectively)
will come anyways.

This is very important for parents, teachers and ourselves, to focus
on giving, as much as possible, effort-related feedback, and avoid
giving label-related feedback.

This, in my opinion, gives us a malicious opportunity (a' la' Robert
Greene): if we want to manipulate someone's results to go down, we could
achieve it by telling them how good they are at what we want them to
become worse at, because by just telling them how talented, good,
intelligent, etc they are, they will end up getting worse over time.
And, therefore, to protect ourselves, be careful to listen too much to
this kind of label-based feedback, so we don't believe it and fall
behind. 

When we're told by modern stoics "focus on what you can control", be
careful to include your levels of effort and attention on what you can
control, that's the basis of growth mindset and the basis of knowing
that, by controlling those, you will also control in great part, the
increase on the quality of your results overtime.

The basis, then, for growth mindset is to avoid believing that when we
did something well or poorly, telling ourselves (via our little
stories about ourselves how things went, how they're doing and how
they will be in the future) that the reason for that is that "we're
good (or bad) at it" (a label). That makes it that when we become
worse at something, we will also attach that to our identity,  so
there's no space to improve at anything. 

On the contrary, growth mindset makes us believe that our successes
and failures are a direct function of the effort and time we put in
that activity, and nothing else (for the most part, let's not start
denying the existence of external factors, but they will not determine
our everyday wins and losses as much as our efforts), so there's
always room for improvement, constant improvement. That's it, so
simple but powerful. Continue to remind ourselves to mold our
self feedback to being an effort-based one because it's worth it.

Another benefit (and also symptom) of having a growth mindset, is that
whenever we're told that we're wrong in an answer, we will allocate
mental resources to cognition, in the sense that we will be asking
ourselves and the context 'why' is that the answer is wrong. So we
will experience less of a emotional response from that mini-failure,
and get to solve it (or at least getting to know the thing better so
we don't get it wrong next time) faster than if not having a growth
mindset.

Stress-Is-Enhancing mindset: in order to get to growth mindset, one
must have another mindset activated, and that one is about how we
think about stress. Dr. Alia Crum, a researcher at Stanford,
discovered in a paper that, our beliefs about stress and its effects
(whether we believe it's detrimental for our performance or beneficial
for our performance) will have a direct effect on the actual
detriments or benefits of stress in our performance: it all has to do
with our mindset. Just by knowing the true great effects that stress
has in our performance.

Although some may have heard that stress will reduce testosterone, and
that's true, it can also (with stress-is-enhancing mindset) be
anabolic, that means, be pro testosterone, pro estrogen, etc.

A former colleague of Dr. Crum, Dr. Daniel Jeager, who runs his own
lab at Stanford, discovered in an experimental design study that by
telling people about growth mindset or stress-is-enhancing minset or
both, will increase their performance significantly against control
groups, and in different types of experiments.

The optimal situation for enhancing student's performance is if both
teachers and students have the growth and stress-enhances mindset;
that is, if they both know all what we know so far by this podcast (or
even more) about the topics.

But if one doesn't have a teacher, a mentor, one can also benefit from
both mindsets by doing a protocol (used by Dr. Jaeger in one of his
experiments) that consists in writing a letter to a future student,
detailing what one knows about neuroplasticity, growth mindset and
stress-is-enhancing mindset (kind of what I copied here from that
youtube comment). That might be beneficial for both the person who
writes and the person who reads it (if one decides to share it with
others [why not?]). 

There's this idea that we often hear about how the brain is like a
muscle. It is not entirely accurate, though. What happens is (taking
the analogy), like if when we go to workout at the gym, instead of the
pump we feel of how our muscles will look like after we let them
recover, we feel a decrease in the muscule size, followed by an actual
long-lasting increase by the muscle. If that's how the muscle works,
then the brain-is-like-a-muscle analogy will be correct. What happens
is that, when we're learning something difficult, we may experience
(in the moment) a stress, a feeling that we're not learning, that it's
too difficult, etc. Those feelings are not only inescapable, but
necessary and indicative that we're actually learning and that soon
will come a moment when we think of those topics as trivial.

> Meditate on the fact that the obstacle is the path.

So if you feel like you're reaching your limits, keep going, because
what's really going on is that you're increasing them.

Finally, a third mindset that encapsulates them all is the mindset
that 'mindsets work', that is, believing that the power of developing
a correct mindset when we engage in activities will actually improve
our performance in all the endeavors we come across. 
