---
title:      "dotenv"
date:       2023-08-24T09:49:30-04:00
tags:       ["swror"]
identifier: "20230824T094930"
---

`dotenv` recognizes more files than just the two we’ve made. 

Things that are likely to change between environments, like URI(s) for
databases or credentials for external services-should be extracted
from the code into environment variables.

`dotenv` loads variables from a `.env` file into `ENV` when the
environment is bootstrapped.

1. Add it to the `Gemfile`:

```ruby
gem 'dotenv-rails', groups: [:development, :test]
```

and `bundle install`.

*******

### Load Order ###

`dotenv` is loaded when the `Application` constant is defined in
`config/application.rb` with `class Application < Rails::Application`
during the `before_configuration` callback.

If we need it initialized sooner we can manually call
`Dotenv::Railtie.load`:

```ruby
# config/application.rb

Bundler.require *Rails.groups

# Load dotenv only in development or test environment

if ['development', 'test'].include? ENV['RAILS_ENV']
  Dotenv::Railtie.load
end

HOSTNAME = ENV['HOSTNAME']
```

We can load environmental variables in a rake task:

```ruby
require 'dotenv/tasks'

task mytask: :dotenv do
  ...
end
```

We can parse a list of `env` files for programmatic inspection without
modifying the `ENV`:

```ruby
Dotenv.parse(".env.local", ".env") # => { 'S3_BUCKET' =>
'YOURS3BUCKET', ... }
```

*******

### Should I use `dotenv` in Production? ###

`dotenv` was created for _development_.

There are typically better ways to manage configuration in production
environments: `/etc/environment` managed by `Puppet`, `Chef`, `heroku
config`...

*******

### Should I commit `.env`? ###

no. but we can commit the template using `dotenv` cli command:

```bash
$ dotenv -t ENV_FILENAME 
```

### Notes from SwRoR ###

Environmental variables contain sensitive information and should not
be checked into version control. We can modify our `.gitignore` to
prevent that from happening.

The first file, .env is used in all environments. This leads to a lot
of confusion and in my experience is better to have development and
testing completely separated, even if that means some duplication in
the two files. The second two files are called .env.development.local
and .env.test.local. These two files override what’s in
.env.development and .env.test, respectively.  

Convention dictates that these two .local files are used when you need
an actual secret on your development machine, such as an AWS key to a
development S3 bucket. 

Unlike our local database credentials, you don’t want to check that
into version control since they are actual secrets you want to keep
protected. 
